---
layout: post
title: "Our Shy Neighbours: The Denizens of Sahyadri"
date: 2026-01-31
subtitle: "Leia Ann Francis and Om Khandge (Grade 9)"
category: January 2026
---

Living in the Sahyadri hills of the Western Ghats means being constantly immersed in nature. For us, it's not just about misty mornings and lush green forests; it's also about the quiet companionship of the langurs and peafowls who graciously share this land with us. 

The langurs are familiar to most if not all on the campus. We often see them leaping effortlessly between trees, their sleek bodies move in a rhythm as they scout for food. While they might appear mischievous, the guards on campus tell us they are incredibly shy. The slightest noise sends them disappearing into the dense canopy within seconds. Langurs are primarily herbivores, with a diet rich in leaves, fruits, and flowers. They are particularly drawn to the fruit trees on our campus, such as the Mango and the Jamun. By eating fruit and either dispersing seeds through their droppings or discarding partially eaten pieces, they play a crucial role in the regeneration of these species.

Another prominent species gracing our campus is the peafowl. We usually hear them first; their loud, distinctive call sounds like a sharp "may-awe!" The peafowls are simply stunning, with their huge, iridescent blue and green tail feathers. While they are a joy to behold, we've learned from our farming staff that they can be a bit of a challenge. Our farmers shared that while the peafowls are shy and come in small groups, they can damage rice plantations by eating the crops. They are particularly fond of peanuts. However, their shy nature means they flee at the first sight of a humans. 

Living in close proximity to these animals has made us reflect on our relationship with them. We've come to understand that they do not visit our campus for trash. Instead, their visits are driven by their natural foraging instincts, attracted by the abundant fruit trees and vegetation that are part of our shared environment and also because we have disturbed their lives with our homes and cars. We need to stay away from feeding these animals and the adults on campus constantly remind us of this. When animals become accustomed to being fed by humans, they can lose their natural foraging skills and may even become aggressive. 
By taking simple steps, such as disposing of our food waste properly, not reacting aggressively to their presence, and refraining from feeding them, we honour an unspoken agreement. This small act can ensure that the langurs and peafowls of Sahyadri can continue to live wild and free, just as they are meant to.
